Add Xcsync docs (#2406)
dotnet/docs-maui: docs/ios/xcsync.md

---

> title: Xcsync for .NET MAUI

Reviewer: How about we refer to this by its full name on first mention, and then we can use its nickname that also aligns with how it's used on CLI. 

```suggestion
title: Xcode Sync (xcsync) for .NET MAUI
```

description: [Xcsync is designed to provide .NET developers with improved support for editing Apple specific files]
author: haritha-mohan, mcumming
ms.date: [08/05/2024]
---

> # Xcsync: improved support for Apple development via .NET

Reviewer: First mention let's use the name and then the nickname

```suggestion
# Xcode Sync (Xcsync)
```

I'm looking at stuff like MSBuild for example of a thing that has a full name and a nickname. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild?view=vs-2022

> Xcsync is a tool designed to provide developers using the .NET MAUI/.NET Apple SDKs have improved support for editing Apple specific files, such as storyboards and assets. The tool generates a temporary Xcode project from a .NET project, monitors both for changes, and synchronizes the changes between them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Xcsync is a tool designed to provide developers using the .NET MAUI/.NET Apple SDKs have improved support for editing Apple specific files, such as storyboards and assets. The tool generates a temporary Xcode project from a .NET project and synchronizes the changes to the Xcode files back.
```

Author: opted for @davidortinau's comment as it incorporated your suggestions as well

> Xcsync is a tool designed to provide developers using the .NET MAUI/.NET Apple SDKs have improved support for editing Apple specific files, such as storyboards and assets. The tool generates a temporary Xcode project from a .NET project, monitors both for changes, and synchronizes the changes between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Xcsync is a tool that enables developers to leverage Xcode for managing Apple specific files with .NET projects. The tool generates a temporary Xcode project from a .NET project and synchronizes changes to the Xcode files back to the .NET project.

Supported file types include:

- Asset Catalogue
- Plist
- Storyboard
- Xib
```

#### How to use Xcsync

> The tool has 2 commands right now: generate and sync. Use generate for tracking your changes from your .NET to Xcode and sync for tracking your changes from Xcode to .NET.<br />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tool has 2 commands: generate and sync. Use generate for tracking your changes from your .NET to Xcode and sync for tracking your changes from Xcode to .NET.<br />
```

Reviewer: So xcsync is installed when I install the iOS, or maui workload? I think making a statement that says "Install .NET 9 Preview 7 or newer" or something is important so the reader knows how to acquire it and/or confirm they have acquired it.

Author: the tool is part of the iOS workload specifically..but good point i'll add further clarification here

Xcsync can be invoked via a dotnet build target, like so:
```dotnet build /t:xcsync-generate``` or ```dotnet build /t:xcsync-sync```

You can also add the xcsync tool path to your PATH environment variable to invoke the tool directly as a more seamless dotnet command.

> You can customize several things regarding the tool's functionality like where the temporary Xcode project will be generated, if you would like to open the Xcode project upon being generated, how verbose you would like the logging output to be. Run ```xcsync [generate/sync] -h``` to learn more.

Reviewer 2: This should be written for the `dotnet build /t:xcsync-*` commands, detailing each of the properties that can be set to override the defaults.

- - - -

#### Known issues

> * The addition of Xcsync to the workload as it is now has made it quite large. In the next release, we plan to optimize how intermediate dependencies are included and make the workload size more manageable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The addition of Xcsync to the workload has increased the overall install and download size of the workloads significantly. In the next release, we plan decrease the overall installed and download workload size by 75% or more.
```

Reviewer: Hmm, can we provide some real numbers? What is "quite large" and "significant"? Did the workload go from 100MB to 1GB? I think providing some real numbers would be better. Of course adding something to the workload will make it bigger, so I'm not sure if this is worth calling attention to just yet.

Now that I'm writing this, how about we keep the Known issues for the release notes, and not include that in the documentation.

Author: ok per both of your reviews, i'll remove the next steps and known issues for the docs and we can save it for release notes/blog post purposes.

@davidortinau i'll try to gather more precise data regarding the size increase!

Reviewer 2: I added two screenshots of before xcsync and after xcsync to the loop document

> * When invoking the tool via the dotnet command with a higher verbosity, the xcsync command might generate some extra output in the logs regarding a compatible .NET SDK not being found. Please disregard this extraneous output, the tool will still execute successfully

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When invoking the tool via the dotnet command with a higher verbosity, the xcsync command might generate some extra output in the logs regarding a compatible .NET SDK not being found. Please disregard this extraneous output, the tool will still execute successfully.
```

* Using an invalid value for the --verbosity, -v results in a runtime exception instead of the proper help message.

- - - -

> #### Next steps:

Reviewer 2: I am not sure we want to have this as part of the documentation. Part of the blog post maybe.

---

> title: Xcode Sync (xcsync) for .NET MAUI

Author: this is the title that shows up on the side tab..since this already under the .NET MAUI docs umbrella, is this specification redundant? alternative title ideas welcome :)

Reviewer 3: Yes, it's redundant. I'd go with something like "Xcode sync" for now.

> description: [Xcsync is designed to provide .NET developers with improved support for editing Apple specific files]

Reviewer 3: Lose the square brackets.

> author: haritha-mohan, mcumming

Reviewer 3: You should use `ms.author` for your MS aliases, and then `author` for your GitHub aliases.

> ms.date: [08/05/2024]

Reviewer 3: Lose the square brackets.

---
# Xcode Sync (Xcsync)

> **This article applies to:** ✔️ .NET Core 9 Preview 7 SDK and later versions

Reviewer 3: You can remove this line, instead add the following to the metadata:

`monikerRange: ">=net-maui-9.0"`

Xcode Sync (Xcsync) is a tool that enables developers to leverage Xcode for managing Apple specific files with .NET projects. The tool generates a temporary Xcode project from a .NET project and synchronizes changes to the Xcode files back to the .NET project.

Supported file types include:

- Asset Catalog
- Plist
- Storyboard
- Xib

> The tool has 2 commands: generate and sync. Use generate for tracking your changes from your .NET to Xcode and sync for tracking your changes from Xcode to .NET. You can also add the xcsync tool path to your PATH environment variable to invoke the tool directly as a more seamless dotnet command.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The tool has 2 commands: generate and sync. Use generate for tracking your changes from your .NET to Xcode and sync for tracking your changes from Xcode to .NET.
```
I would remove the PATH suggestion because we will break these customers in the next release once we move this into a pack, I would add it back once we do not change its location

## Synopsis

### xcsync-generate

```dotnetcli
dotnet build /t:xcsync-generate [-p|--project <PROJECT>]
    [-tfm|--target-framework-moniker <FRAMEWORK>]
    [-t|--target <TARGET_DIRECTORY>] [-f|--force [true|false]]
    [-o|--open [true|false]]
    [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]
    [-d|--dotnet-path <.NET_SDK_PATH>]

dotnet build /t:xcsync-generate -?|-h|--help

> ```

Author: to make the option specifications easier to digest, i followed the documentation style used for other .net cli commands: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-build

Reviewer 2: The property names come from here: https://github.com/xamarin/xamarin-macios/pull/20975/files#diff-2e24f1b6f44df7580244d00f106fa1a9e2257536fbca9d7bbdc74571549324a9R2424-R2427 
and need to be specified using `dotnet build /t:xcsync-generate /p:[PropertyName]=[Value]`

### xcsync-sync

```dotnetcli
dotnet build /t:xcsync-sync [-p|--project <PROJECT>]
    [-tfm|--target-framework-moniker <FRAMEWORK>]
    [-t|--target <TARGET_DIRECTORY>]
    [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]
    [-d|--dotnet-path <.NET_SDK_PATH>]

> dotnet build /t:xcsync-sync -?|h|--help

Reviewer: I probably lack understanding of how parameters go to `build` vs the task `xcsyn-sync`, but what happens if I specify `-f net9.0-ios` which `build` understands, but then `-tfm net9.0-macos` which the task understands? I see we use -f for force, and probably -tfm makes more sense but dotnet cli pre-existed tfms and so it's framework... anyway, nothing I should worry about here?

Author: clarified the docs using xcsync-specific params, let me know if it still needs improvement!

```

### Arguments

- **`-p|--project <PROJECT>`**

>   The .NET project file to build. This is **required**.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  The .NET for iOS/tvOS/macOS/MacCatalyst project file to build. This is **required**.
```

Author: reworded the description a bit

### Options

These are optional; if not specified, the default value will be used.

- **`-tfm|--target-framework-moniker <FRAMEWORK>`**

>   Invoke the tool for a specific framework. The framework must be defined in the project file. Examples: `net9.0-ios`, `net9.0-maccatalyst`. **Required** if the .NET project supports multiple tfms (for example, a standard MAUI project). If a single platform project, the default value will be the single tfm specified in the project file.

Author: eh this is not as clean as i would like to be...

but basically it's required when there's multiple tfms to choose from but not for when there is only one..the tool does a decent job of error-handling this case...

>   Invoke the tool for a specific framework. The framework must be defined in the project file. Examples: `net9.0-ios`, `net9.0-maccatalyst`. **Required** if the .NET project supports multiple tfms (for example, a standard MAUI project). If a single platform project, the default value will be the single tfm specified in the project file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Invoke the tool for a specific framework. The framework must be defined in the project file. Examples: `net9.0-ios`, `net9.0-maccatalyst`. **Required** if the .NET project supports multiple tfms (for example, a standard MAUI project). If a single platform project, the default value will be the single tfm specified in the project file. You can find more about TFMs [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/frameworks).
```

Reviewer: wherever the first usage of TFM is in this doc, it should be spelled out "Target Framework Moniker (TFM)"

>   Invoke the tool for a specific framework. The framework must be defined in the project file. Examples: `net9.0-ios`, `net9.0-maccatalyst`. **Required** if the .NET project supports multiple tfms (for example, a standard MAUI project). If a single platform project, the default value will be the single tfm specified in the project file.

Reviewer 5: I'd avoid "tfm" in the text, and spell it out fully: "target framework"

```suggestion
  Invoke the tool for a specific framework. The framework must be defined in the project file. Examples: `net9.0-ios`, `net9.0-maccatalyst`. **Required** if the .NET project supports multiple target frameworks (for example, a standard MAUI project). If a single platform project, the default value will be the single target framework specified in the project file.
```

- **`-t|--target <TARGET_DIRECTORY>`**
  Directory in which to place the generated Xcode project. Default path is `./obj/xcode`
- **`-f|--force [true|false]`**
  Forces target directory to be overidden. Default value is `true`.
- **`-o|--open [true|false]`**
  Opens Xcode project. Default value is `false`.
- **`-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>`**
  Sets verbosity level of the command. Allowed values are `Detailed`, `Diagnostic`, `Minimal`, `Normal`, `Quiet`. Default value is `Normal`.
- **`-d|--dotnet-path <.NET_SDK_PATH>`**
  Sets the path to the .NET SDK to use. Default path is parent process if `dotnet`; otherwise, will use `dotnet` on the PATH environment variable.
- **`-?|-h|--help`**
  Prints out a description of how to use the command.

### Examples

> - Generate and open a Xcode project for a MAUI project that supports .net9.0-ios

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Generate and open a Xcode project for a MAUI project that supports the `net9.0-ios` [TFM](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/frameworks).
```

  ```dotnetcli
  dotnet build /t:xcsync-generate --project "path/to/maui.csproj" -tfm "net9.0-ios -o"
  ```

- Sync changes from a generated Xcode project in the default location (./obj/xcode) back to a .NET macOS project

>   ```dotnetcli

Author: any other ideas on important examples to include?

>   dotnet build /t:xcsync-sync --project "path/to/macOS.csproj"

Reviewer: I find it confusing that you generate with a maui project but sync back to a macOS project. If the goal is to indicate that more than just a maui project is supported, I would keep the examples consistent using maui and then add a list of supported tfms.

Author: made the exs more maui centric! and the project option earlier discusses the allowed platforms
